Introduction to exceptional handling in Javascript

In this lecture let’s look into the exceptional handling in javascript. Exception
handling is a technique in programming to handle errors and exceptions that
occur during the execution of a program. In JavaScript, the try-and-catch
statements are used to handle exceptions.

We should always keep the complex code in a try-catch statement. The try
statement and catch statement in javascript come in pairs.


Introduction to exceptional handling in Javascript

Before understanding, exception handling it is important to understand the types
of errors.

There are two main types of errors in JavaScript:

1. Syntax Errors: occur when the code syntax is not proper and the JavaScript
interpreter can't understand it. This error can't be handled with exception
handling.

2. Runtime Errors: occur while the code is executing, such as when trying to
access an undefined variable or when a function is not found. These errors can
be handled using exception handling.

Only run-time errors which occur during the execution can be handled using
exception handling in JavaScript.


Introduction to try-catch

Try statement
It is a piece of code that needs to be tested during the execution of code. The
block of code is checked if it has any errors or not. If any errors are encountered,
then the try{} statement passes it to the catch{} statement block. Once the
control is handed over to the catch block the code block under catch{} will be
executed.

Catch Statement
The catch statement defines a block of code that gets executed when any errors
are encountered within the try block. The catch block gets executed only when
there is any error present in the try block and the error needs to be addressed.
Otherwise, the catch block gets skipped. The catch block gets executed only after
the execution of the try block.


try-catch-finally

In addition to the catch statement, we can also use the finally statement, which
defines a block of code that will be executed regardless of whether an exception
was thrown or not. This can be used to perform other actions after the
try-and-catch statements have been executed.

Syntax of try-catch-finally

// Syntax of try-catch-finally
try{
// block of code for testing.
}catch{
// block of code for addressing errors.
}finally {
// block of code to run after try-catch
}